Thatcher's Bruges speech 'not anti-EU' - former aide
By Laurence Peter
BBC News
Margaret Thatcher at European Council in Strasbourg, 8 Dec 89
Margaret Thatcher and Jacques Delors (second from left) were in opposing camps on European policy
Continue reading the main story
Related Stories

Obituary: Margaret Thatcher
Thatcher and her tussles with Europe
Thatcher funeral's place in history
Margaret Thatcher's landmark Bruges speech about the future of Europe was never intended to push the UK towards the exit, the man who wrote it says.

Charles Powell was a senior foreign policy adviser to Lady Thatcher in the 1980s. Her Bruges speech is often seen as an inspiration for Eurosceptics.

She was, Lord Powell said, alarmed at a perceived power grab by Jacques Delors, the then European Commission chief.

"In office she remained a European" but was setting out a new vision, he said.

"She knew exactly what she was doing when she led the referendum campaign in 1975," he continued, referring to the Conservatives' support for continued UK membership of the European Community at the time. "It was always within the terms of the EU."

She had championed the European single market and accepted more qualified majority voting, instead of the principle of unanimity, because she did not want individual countries to block that market, he said.

Watershed speech
The European Community became the European Union under the 1992 Maastricht Treaty, which put the bloc on the path to a single currency, the euro.

Lord Powell, file pic
Lord Powell was a top foreign policy aide to Lady Thatcher in the 1980s
Thatcher died on 8 April this year, at the age of 87.

The Bruges speech of 1988 is seen as a watershed in her career - it deepened a rift with cabinet colleagues, notably Sir Geoffrey Howe and Michael Heseltine, and was central to the policy split that led to her fall from power.

Prime Minister David Cameron's Bloomberg speech in January echoed many of the themes raised in the Bruges speech, especially concern about the nature of EU integration and the treaty commitment to "an ever closer union".

Unlike Thatcher, however, Mr Cameron promised UK voters an in/out referendum on EU membership - provided the Conservatives win the 2015 election and achieve a "new settlement" on the membership terms, negotiated with Brussels.

Opinion polls suggest that British voters are almost evenly divided over whether to stay in or leave the 28-nation EU.

Richard Ashworth, leader of the Conservative MEPs in Europe, said Mr Cameron's speech was "pretty much a mirror image" of the Bruges speech. He said "mission creep" by the European Commission - the EU's executive - was still a key issue today.

He and Lord Powell were speaking in a debate on the historical impact of Thatcher's speech, held at the European Parliament's offices in London.

New agenda for Europe
Before the speech Thatcher had famously clashed with Mr Delors over the UK contribution to the EU budget - a battle she eventually won by securing a big rebate. She also opposed Mr Delors's vision of a "social Europe" - the drive to make Brussels a guardian of workers' rights.

Margaret Thatcher in Strasbourg, 8 Dec 89
Margaret Thatcher was enthusiastic about the EU single market
Lord Powell said Thatcher was surprised at the reaction to her speech, especially the way some saw it as a Eurosceptic attack on Europe.

"It wasn't designed for patriotic home consumption," he said. "She thought she was setting a different agenda for Europe."

In what some see as prophetic words from the "Iron Lady" she looked forward to eastward enlargement, to take in East European countries which were still under Soviet domination.

"We must never forget that east of the Iron Curtain, people who once enjoyed a full share of European culture, freedom and identity have been cut off from their roots," she said at the College of Europe in Bruges. "We shall always look on Warsaw, Prague and Budapest as great European cities."

The speech fuelled Conservative divisions over Europe and inspired the creation of the Bruges Group, a think tank that strives to defend the sovereignty of EU member states.

'Downward slope'
Lord Powell said it was not Thatcher's aim to set off a Eurosceptic chain reaction among British Conservatives with her speech. "I don't think she'd given it a moment's thought," he said.

But he added that she was already on a "downward slope" in relations with the EU.

Sir Stephen Wall, who was a senior Foreign Office adviser to Thatcher at the time, said it was only much later that "being loyal to her became synonymous with being anti-European".

Lord Powell said Thatcher and her aides underestimated the importance of the embryonic single currency. The euro crisis has accelerated moves towards political integration in the EU.

"We didn't take monetary union seriously," he said, adding that Thatcher had spoken scornfully about plans for a European Central Bank.