Royal Marine corporal sentenced for ill-treating recruits
Lympstone commando training centre
Cpl Peter Clark, based at the Commando Training Centre in Lympstone, admitted three offences
Continue reading the main story
Related Stories

Corporal 'hit recruit in groin'
A Royal Marine drill instructor who ill-treated new recruits, including hitting one in the groin with a stick, has been fined for his actions.

Corporal Peter Clark pleaded guilty to three offences of ill-treating subordinates at the Commando Training Centre in Lympstone, Devon.

A court martial at Portsmouth Naval Base heard he used a pace stick to hit the recruit in the testicles.

The 39-year-old was given a severe reprimand and fined £1,750.

On Monday, Clark admitted hitting Marine Recruit (MR) Joshua Croxford with the stick on 30 June last year.

He also admitted two earlier incidents, in which he grabbed MR Matthew Scott round the throat on 19 May and hit MR Adam Lushman in the face with a pair of combat boots on 9 June.

'Over-zealousness'
A panel of three senior officers determined the sentence handed out to Clark.

Sentencing him, Judge Advocate General Jeff Blackett said that while young commandos and marines have to be trained to a very high standard, "there is no place in training for physical and mental abuse".

The judge added that although serious, Clark's behaviour was not severe enough to warrant a custodial sentence or a demotion in rank.

"It is clear from what we have heard, what you did was out of genuine over-zealousness and you had the interest of the corps at your heart," he said.Tory conference: Hip-hop Hamlet 'racist and evil'
By Hannah Richardson
BBC News education reporter
Lindsay Johns
Lindsay Johns was concerned about black children being denied access to classic literature
Continue reading the main story
Conservative Conference 2013

Surplus plan responsible - Cameron
Cameron: Be great to have Boris back
Job centre 'nine-to-five' plan
EU obsession 'stops Tories winning'
Teaching Shakespeare with a hip-hop soundtrack is patronising, evil and "viciously racist" to black pupils, the Tory Party conference has been told.

Youth mentor and writer Lindsay Johns, a guest speaker invited by Education Secretary Michael Gove, said teachers were "hell-bent on making everything cool or hip".

They should "stop genuflecting at the altar of youth", he said.

"Hamlet doesn't need a hip-hop sound track for young people to enjoy it."

Mr Johns added: "It's been doing just fine for the last 400 years."

Continue reading the main story
“
Start Quote

Our aim is for the young people to confound, not conform to stereotypes”

Lindsay Johns
Writer and youth mentor
"It's not only incredibly patronising, but also viciously racist to think that black and brown kids in the inner cities will only 'get Shakespeare' if it's set to a hip-hop beat and presented in three-minute, MTV-Base-style chunks.

"It is positively evil to deny inner city kids access to the manifold joys of hearing their national poet's true voice, in essence their birthright, simply because of a culture of low expectations."

Mr Johns said he was tired of "vacuous PC [politically correct] educationalists who took great offence at Mr Gove's drive for a national curriculum more focused on English literary classics and the history of Britain.

He said: "Young people need more not fewer dead white men - by dead white men I mean the Western literary canon.

"You can of course be fiercely proud of your Jamaican, Ghanaian or black British roots and ardently love Horace, Boccaccio and Milton.

"The two are in no way mutually exclusive and they certainly don't make you any less black or less brown by reading them."

The novels of Jane Austen and Charles Dickens were just as relevant to all young people no matter what colour or creed, he said, adding that it was "positively nefarious" to deny access to them.

Mr Johns also attacked "bling culture" and "ghetto grammar", which he said were holding some youngsters back and making them sound like they had had "a frontal lobotomy"

"Our aim is for the young people to confound, not conform to stereotypes," he said.

Mr Johns, who himself studied French and Italian at Oxford, also said a portrayal of the universities of Oxford and Cambridge as institutionally racist was "actually putting off ferociously bright, black, brown, and white, working-class kids from applying".

"Maybe, just maybe, if you didn't keep on discouraging them from applying in the first place with your duplicitous horror stories of how terrible life is there, then levels of representation would actually get better," he said.
The corporal was due to stand trial on 14 charges, but following his three guilty pleas, the prosecution offered no evidence on the other charges.

Judge Advocate Gen Jeff Blackett formally found him not guilty of those 11 charges.